The Slopes of Te Aroha

I haven't felt so relaxed in months,' said Dianne as we walked hand-in-hand
along the dirt road. We had just spent most of the day paddling around in
the Waiorongomai Stream, which runs out of the valley of the same name.
Dianne was an Australian hosteller, now on her third day at the hostel. The
hostel had been unusually busy the night before (eight people) and she
wanted to spend her last day at Te Aroha away from people. I had suggested
she try the Waiorongomai for a bit of skinny-dipping and soul-searching, but
she didn't want to go alone. Since it was a warm March day and Dianne was
well-spoken -- and was tall, blonde, and attractively built, with a sweet face
besides -- I had gone along. (Well, what else could I do?)

The Waiorongomai Valley lay about six kilometres south of the hostel. I
was wont to go there frequently, alone or in company. When I went alone,
I generally cycled. When I went with hostellers, I generally walked. The walk
this day -- out of town along the road that hugs the feet of the Kaimais, then
turn off and walk along a dirt road through farms until the car park near the
site of the old gold battery --took about an hour. At the car park, we
climbed over fallen rocks and forded the icy stream (a six-metre journey that
washed away all the dust and sweat that the six-kilometre journey preceding
it had coated on us) and struck off up the valley along one of the many
paths that thread the area. Before long this brought us back to the stream,
at the point where most local picnickers would stop. We did not stop,
however, for my favourite spots were reachable only by people willing to
wade upstream a considerable distance, and involved a bit of scrambling over
rocks besides. This was not a drawback, for without these obstacles there
would have been nowhere in the valley worth bathing nude. Too many casual
passers-through would have spoiled it.

    Eventually we reached the nearer of my two preferred spots -- a swirl-pool
about ten metres across, with a wide area in the middle where the water was
too deep to stand in. When I first came there it was much smaller, but I
could see the ruins of a rock-dam at the downstream exit. With great labour
I had rebuilt the dam, replacing the large boulders that some flood had
washed away and filling the interstices with smaller rocks and gravel. Some
boulders bigger than a bull had been so balanced that with just a little
sapping I was able to topple their round bellies into the holes dug for them
and so bring their flat tops into perfect position for sunning on. Although
several paths ran along the valley walls on either side, I had satisfied myself
that this spot, at least, was overlooked by none of them, unless someone
cared to scramble down a muddy slope with no guarantee of getting back up
again.
    Arrived, we stripped off and dived in. I was first out again, and was vastly
amused by Dianne's expression as she waded out after, goose-pimpled and
puckered all over. The wading we had done on our way upstream had not
prepared her for the coldness of the deep pool, and I had not warned her.
But I grinned at her and dived back in to show that it wasn't that bad.

    That bad or no, despite vigourous swimming and paddling, ten minutes of
the water was more than enough, and we crawled out. I had arranged two
rocks side-by-side, with a third facing them, all within easy distance for quiet
conversation. After the water, the sensation of sun-warmed rock against my
back and mild autumn sun on my face was bliss. And so we lay there, in the
green-walled grey stone valley, baking slowly, talking in the relaxed way that
the location allowed. There was something about the calls of the birds and
the occasional crackles and louder rustling of the greenery, and the chuckling
of the water as it flowed over rocks and falls, that denied the outside world
access to the valley. Problems and worries washed away with the water, down
and away, out of sight and out of mind.

    Dianne was in NZ on the first stopover of a trip that would take her to
the US and back via the Pacific Islands. She had just broken with her
husband, and hoped to use the trip to regain her own identity and rest up
preparatory to building a new life when she returned to Oz. She was strongly
anti-male at this time. `I'm a man,' I said. `Yes,' she said, `And that's been
worrying me.' `Then relax,' I said. `Think of me as a Boy Scout on a Bob-a-
Job Day. My Job is to be cheerful company, and my Bob is the pleasure of
your company. Today is for relaxing. I promise to be a good boy no matter
what. Scout's Honour.' And I made the Scout salute with my toes, as nearly
as I could, a position so foolish that she had to laugh. And after that she was
open to the aura of the valley and we talked more and more freely and
openly, while her cares fell off her and slithered dryly into the stream and
were washed away.

 